# Release Notes for v8

## Multi-BSP Support

The SDE uses a platform-independent API to isolate hardware-specific
features.  A Baseboard Support Package (BSP) implements the API for a
specific class of devices.  Up to v7, the SDE only supported the
"reference" BSP from Intel, which restricted the SDE package to work
only on the WEDGE-series of devices from Accton/EdgeCore (e.g. the
WEDGE100BF-32X and WEDGE100BF-65X).

Version v8 extends the SDE to support additional BSPs.  The source
archives for those BSPs need to be obtained directly from the vendors.
This release supports the BSPs from APS/Stordis and Inventec (see the
README for details).

A BSP provides support for one or more _baseboards_, each of which
supports one or more _platforms_, i.e. actual devices.  For example,
the reference BSP supports the baseboard `accton`, which supports all
WEDGE-based platforms.

The following changes are made to the internal structure of the SDE

   * The `bsp` attribute in the SDE specifications in
     `bf-sde/default.nix` is replaced with a set 'bsps' containing one
     attribute per BSP.
   * The `bf-platforms` sub-package is replaced by a set of
     derivations, one for each baseboard.
   * The `runtimeEnv` sub-package is replaced by a set of support
     funtions (`runtimeEnv`, `runtimeEnv'` and `runtimeEnvNoBsp`) that
     create runtime environments for specific baseboards.
   * The `buildP4Program` support function takes a new argument
     `platform` to select the platform (and thus the baseboard) for
     which to build the program.
	 
The reference BSP also provides a pseudo-baseboard called `model` that
can be used to create a runtime environment in which a P4 program can
be executed on the Tofino software emulator.  If `buildP4Program` is
called with `platform` set to `model`, the resulting executable
launches the Tofino model, creates the `veth` interfaces to connected
to the emulated ports and then starts `bf_switchd` to run the program
on the model, all in one go.
